[Description]

Brute Primer (codenamed "Korrin") is a command-line program that generates PCR
primers using a brute-force method. It allows the user to specify what regions
of a sequence to generate primers, the range of primer lengths, and the output
format (XML or TSV) for the primer candidates. Brute Primer relies on
thermonucleotideBLAST (tntBLAST) from Los Alamos National Lab to select the
subset of primer candidates that are consistent and unique in their annealing
locations.

An advantage of Brute Primer is that primers are generated and considered in an
exhaustive manner. This is a disadvantage in and of itself: depending on the
parameters given, it may take Brute Primer a significant amount of time to
complete. To effectively use the output from Brute Primer, the user should know
XQuery (recommended) or SQL (when the output is in TSV).

Brute Primer is coded in Perl, XQuery, and XSLT.


[Motivation]

Brute Primer was developed after Primer3 (through the command-line interface
from EMBOSS) failed to design primers for a substantial number of long-flanking
homology PCR (LFH-PCR) experiments, which was used for deleting small,
non-coding RNA (sRNA) genes in /Bacillus subtilis/. The thought of designing
primers by hand was unattractive because of the high chance of human error.

Regardless of whether primers were designed by Primer3 or by hand, the primers
would still be checked for their reasonableness using tntBLAST. This, in turn,
provided the idea of creating all possible primers of varying lengths and then
consulting tntBLAST to determine a valid subset of such primers.


[Operating Systems]

Debian Linux 8
Windows 7

Other operating systems or versions may work, but they were not tested.


[Prerequisites]

Perl 5.20
Zorba 3.0 or 4.0 <http://www.zorba.io/home>
thermonucleotideBLAST 2.01 <http://public.lanl.gov/jgans/tntblast/index.html>

The following CPAN modules are required.

URI::file
XML::LibXML
XML::LibXSLT


[Installation on Linux]

(1) Install the required CPAN modules.

(2) Install Zorba. Depending on the Linux distribution, Zorba can be installed
from a repository or must be compiled from source. Make sure that zorba can be
found from the PATH variable.

(3) Install tntBLAST. There are no binary distributions of tntBLAST. Therefore,
tntBLAST needs to be compiled from source. Configuring with --enable-openmp and
then setting the OMP_NUM_THREADS environment variable after installation
increases performance during execution. Make sure that tntblast can be found
from the PATH variable.

(4) Copy the Brute Primer release to any directory. brute-primer.pl is the main
script.


[Installation on Windows]

(1) Install Strawberry Perl 5.20 or greater. Make sure that perl can be found
from the PATH variable.

(2) If necessary, install the required CPAN modules.

(3) Install Zorba. There are official binary distributions of Zorba 3.0 (but
not Zorba 4.0 as of this release) for Windows. Make sure that zorba can be
found from the PATH variable.

(4) Install tntBLAST. There are no binary distributions of tntBLAST. Therefore,
tntBLAST needs to be compiled from source, which can be done in Cygwin. The gcc
from Strawberry Perl cannot be used. Instead, the gcc from Cygwin must be used.
After compilation and installation, make sure that tntblast can be found from
the PATH variable.

(5) Copy the Brute Primer release to any directory. brute-primer.pl is the main
script.


[Usage]

Brute Primer is a command-line program. Assuming brute-primer.pl is in the
current directory, the following command on Linux will display the options that
Brute Primer accepts.

./brute-primer.pl -help

On Windows, use the following command.

perl brute-primer.pl -help

For an example of how to use Brute Primer, see the example directory. Knowledge
of XQuery is required to follow the example. The selected primers in the
example were used in a successful LFH-PCR experiment.


[License]

Brute Primer is under the BSD 3-Clause license. See the LICENSE file.
